thank you good evening everyone I'm
Michele gray the director of programming
for the New York Times live conversation
series times talks for 20 years time
stocks has paired New York Times
journalists with the brightest and
boldest creative minds from the fields
of art politics social justice film and
television I'm delighted to welcome you
to tonight's event with Emmy
award-winning comedian writer producer
and television host Stephen Colbert
dubbed the most inventive comedian of
his generation for the second year in a
row the Late Show has earned Emmy
nominations for outstanding variety talk
show series outstanding for writing for
a variety series and outstanding
directing for a variety series more than
just an entertainer Colbert has used his
comedic talents acerbic wit and
political parodies to impact culture in
extraordinary raise over the past decade
moderating tonight's conversation is
soap and Deb a cultural reporter for The
New York Times writing about the
intersection of politics and culture
before joining the Times soap and
covered
Donald J Trump's presidential campaign
for CBS News please join me in giving a
very warm welcome to soap and Deb and
Stephen Colbert
[Music]
well I usually don't get that kind of
applause when I walk into her
hello everybody welcome thank you so
much for coming we're so glad you are
here I think we should just get to it we
have a lot to get through if you could
keep you know don't run onto stage or
anything like that although some of you
might be tempted so Stephen I wonder if
you could start by taking us through a
typical day for you what was today like
40 can I start by saying he's anyone
fooled by taking the label off of this
bottle
what company could that be I go to work
I get in the car around 8:15 it takes me
an hour an hour and 15 minutes to get
into the city I live in the New York
area and I on the way in I'm reading the
news breakdown that somebody has made
the night before or gotten up early that
morning to give me essentially what the
national conversation is today what the
major stories are or what they could be
what the speculation is what will sort
of grow as the day goes on I read
scripts that have been sent to me the
night before I all read I'll probably
listen to the daily actually if I've got
a moment if I finish all that I'll
listen to the daily if I haven't already
listened to it when I'm sort of getting
ready for my day maybe listen to up
first
I'll read Drudge I'll see what's on the
main page of Drudge I'll see was in the
main page of HuffPo I'll look at the
cover of The Times I might look at the
post I'll look at the politics page for
reddit the the the the trending or
what's it called the the rising links or
the front page of Reddit to see what
sort of getting popular this in the
morning and then then I'll call right
before I get to the office I'll call my
executive producer Tom Purcell and I'll
say what you got chief and so on that
first car ride that's all in the car car
ride right takes an hour or an hour 15
minute look at that and some of that I
might have done before I come in like
listen to a podcast or something like
that and then there's gonna be a long
answer if you don't want like decision
it's a long day there are a lot of steps
to the day there's nothing pithy about
the answer I'm about to give you sure
then I talked to my executor Tom Purcell
and I say what's well what's going on
what do we have cooking already what
like what do you see and what I've
already read then we'll have a
discussion about the major conversation
of the day like today was like how much
can we talk about Omarosa how much are
we gonna talk about armor OSes book yes
it all kind of broken happened after our
last show which was on Thursday night
and then we talked about well what are
the issues of credibility or something
like that we have our own sort of
internal debate which I'm sure you know
real news does also how much can we
Creedence can we give to this and how
much is it worth
talking about so then we make those
decisions I get there they usually hold
the meeting for me if I'm a little bit
late just so I can be there to hear the
initial pitch because it's just a
quicker day if I've already heard their
initial pitch in the morning and I can
sort of say oh this is the part that I
like or add my two cents or they can see
the enthusiasm in my eyes about what
stories are being percolated and then I
leave that room all just being assigned
and then I go meet with Chris Licht who
is my showrunner who's sort of the nuts
and bolts get you know make the trains
run on time if you'll pardon the
expression of the guy who actually like
you know does the production of the show
and and he'll tell me what the ratings
were the night before he goes okay this
is what happened and this is what they
this is what they like these are the
acts that sort of pop for people and
then we'll do show business I don't know
whether it's like something the network
might want or what our schedule might be
or guess that might be coming up things
I could help us sometimes I might call a
guest or like say love to have you on
then I go down and do what's called we I
do what's called DTF which go on yes so
then then I'm up for then I'm DTF you
know and DTF means digital talent field
meaning what does digital team need from
me what is the talent team for me like
what am I gonna do with my guests
like I'm having Mark Wahlberg wrong
tomorrow night Wahlberg wants to come in
early to do a bit what that bid might be
so we'll jam for a while what that is
digital might want me to record
something for the web and then field
what am i shooting in the field or what
does the field already shot that I need
to see usually I go to an edit room for
that then after that it's time to talk
to guest questions and the producers
come in and tell me about the
pre-interview they had like friends what
time is this therapy this is around
12:30 now and there's a little bit of
break time in there where I might do
whatever I need to talk to my assistant
and then I do the producers come in and
tell about the guest tonight my guests
who are Guy Pearce and Nicki Minaj and
and so they might say oh this is the
conversation we had with Nicki Minaj or
this is the conversation to have with
Guy Pearce and here are the four
subjects
that we think will be fruitful and I
don't want them to tell me what they're
gonna say just say these are the areas
and then they'll say anything else
interests you about this person I think
you want to say back any game you want
to play or they might have a game idea
for me and i--i for instance tonight one
of my producers pointed out that what
the news is it's called Barbie dreams is
that the new Nicki Minaj song anybody
this Wow
he's anger on the pulse of our culture
he's alright these are New York Times
subscribers exactly I bet I bet she is
though I bet Mickey Minaj's she's sharp
so they had like oh like these are the
lyrics to the song where she's got beefs
with all these male celebrities who want
to get with her and she said these are
the reasons why you'll never be with me
sexually and I said I noticed I'm not on
the list and then she and then she's
like oh that's that that might I invite
her to say like why aren't on the list
so that's but the extent of the
conversation it's been ten minutes for
each person then they leave then I have
some alone time today I spoke with my
wife on the phone it's really nice we
had a little conversation then after
that after I get ready for the show by
two o'clock yeah ish ish that's what I
should be but I don't generally fudge it
a little bit I like to have out I like
to walk around the building just to say
hi to everybody so I'm not just a guy
behind you know a locked door at the end
of the hall which those show could
easily turn into you know these shows
are famous for isolating the host and I
don't want to do that and so I'd walk
around I might have a comic just
dropping with a producer or the writers
are pretty busy but if I can a writer I
like to pop into research and just say
what's going on like what's what's
happening today since our first
conversation what do I need to know and
then after that I have to shower shave
dress makeup hair and then rehearsal and
that's a three and then rehearsal goes
from three to four ish and then there's
then we go into a very intense rewrite
we have an hour and a half to rewrite
the show and then that room gets very
unpolite
hey you know that's that they're very
you in there while the rewrites
happening yeah yeah yeah
because I saw the pitch in the morning
but I didn't see the rewrite that
happened to mill the day then I didn't
see that I didn't see the draft I didn't
see the rewrite that happened mill the
day or the collation or the we're
killing this whole aspect of the story
or we're killing this whole aspect we're
killing this entire story because the
script didn't come back and we just have
to you know we have to pick our chickens
for the day and then I might say how
come we don't have the thing on the
rally that turned out to be nothing in
Indy see the begging of the nothing
burger and like well that we we only had
one joke that really worked well what
was the joke and and I'll tell you the
joke cause it's not gonna be on the show
tonight another thing the joke was oh
they came out in numbers those numbers
about 20 to 25 white nationalist shows
up wow I'm surprised usually when two
dozen white nationalists get together in
Washington it's just a cabinet meeting
so that's it that we tried that in the
monologue I think it went well but we
try not to do a show we're trying to do
a story there's only one joke we try to
do at least three jokes on a story
because we we actually don't think of
our monologue is like going up there and
telling jokes though there it's joke
packed we talk about um we're
storytellers and that's the sort of the
aspect of the old show - the new show
that's it that survived most is that
while we do a monologue we do a much
longer monologue than everybody else and
the reason is because we do we insist on
doing four or five ten jokes on a single
subject to tell the story to the
audience we're there to be storytellers
and that I think that's what for me has
made the monologue interesting to me
because I thought I wouldn't enjoy a
monologue I sort of resisted doing the
monologue at first until we found a way
to do it
that wasn't just set up punch that a
punch then the then in that rewrite so
many things are changing graphics are
changing video is changing Chris licked
icky and my showrunner is the whole time
got his this this is where he has a lot
of input into the actual the content of
the show because he's going this is
what's changing this is this is what's
breaking this is the aspect of the story
that's different now and so he'll ride
herd on what is the priority in arm
well we actually have to keep and what
can go because we're always long we were
10 minutes long in rehearsal today which
means somewhere 10 mins has got to come
out now hopefully there's one story
that's not working you popped out five
minutes right there something like that
but sometimes you got a nickel and dimed
it to death and that's when you have to
start making priorities and go like are
we really strangling a story that needs
to be the only story tonight because
it's the only thing that that's going to
be in the national conversation for the
next I want to say 24 hours but it's
like six hours right
you know if we're lucky at six hours if
we're lucky I'll get on the show that we
did today which I was really happy with
will be the story still by 11:35 tonight
but many's the time at we do show at
5:35 where's Chris but there at 5:35
many's the time at 4:45 that we just go
Oh what he did what and then we have to
tear up the first act we have written in
hire monologues in 45 minutes did that
happen with James coming got fired
correct it happened with Comey got fired
it's happened several times actually and
there's very frequently there's a
there's a like space force space force
was the first which was just that was
Thursday right space force was Thursday
god
Thursday we that we were done and we
were still we were already long we were
like two minutes long how are we gonna
lose two minutes from this because I
don't want to lose it from the guests
and though that can accordion a little
bit and and then and you went space
force and then writers assistant is
going like they're working on it
upstairs and so that means the head
writers opus Moreschi and J Katz here
have already got the writers working on
this thing where Trump has made this
announcement or depents its pants is
further the story of space force which
allows you to go and dip into some of
the things the president is said about
space for us and then you've got the
graphics team we're throwing things at
the wall as quickly as we can and it's
like the first four minutes of the
monologue which came together I think in
15 minutes
something insane like that and so it
gets impolite in that room because you
know there is no time
though politeness is a great Greece
especially when you're in a hurry
they're the only times I've had to like
turn to a group of people and apologize
about the way I've behaved is in that
room and how often does that happen
fairly infrequently right very rarely
very real I feel terrible about it once
the show's over but I have to feel fine
about it until the show's over and
that's it then the show and we do it in
real time you know it's we start at 5:35
when at 6:35 unless there's like a
bandha story to a song and then we do a
post-mortem where we go like ok anything
to do you know how long are we oh what
ok like tonight
Nicki Minaj was fantastic guy Pierce was
great the monologues went long well we
can't shorten Mac Miller the musician so
we talked about what can come out of the
show like what if there's something they
can push til tomorrow that's great
because then part of our meal is cooked
for tomorrow and and and if not then
it's just like oh well that like that
that joke about you know that's usually
just a cabinet meeting I think that's
the section that has to go tonight
and that's fine because who wants to up
draft those assholes you know just like
don't even talk about them and and then
we're done then we're done and then
usually our that I rush down to the New
York Times to be interviewed thank you
yes this is this happens every day all
the time yeah this is is that day just
described compared to the first year of
the show is that a chaotic day or has
you have you kind of like oh my gosh no
no no it is listen you are always to a
certain extent on a show like this and I
think anybody who hosts one of these
shows or runs one of these shows or like
Tom Purcell like is a creative exactly
one of these shows it's all it always
feels a little bit like a flaming
toboggan ride you know a blindfolded
flaming toboggan right
that's the joke they get Nicki Minaj
they don't get them flying toboggan
they'll get exactly you you never know
what you just don't know today's gonna
be like so you're always surfing the
chaos right know you surf the madness is
what we sometimes I just surf the
madness and just hope that you know you
you you you don't wipe out before the
end of the day my executive producer Tom
Purcell I love he's got the same that I
just love you is one hour of today is
gonna
suck let's not make it the last hour
because that's the one the audience sees
so the earlier the early if it's gonna
suck make your day suck earlier in the
day and so you always have to know
there's going to be a level of chaos but
we have a process in place now that is
pretty ironclad and and in it's ironclad
nough stare is flexibility because you
don't know what's gonna happen but first
you have to have things to be repeatable
like a clock on the show so that you can
then take risks and that was one of the
great things that Chris brought to us is
that he has a brilliant eye for process
and keeping people in their own lanes
and once we knew how to do that we could
start doing the show that we wanted to
do but it's it's it's always chaotic to
a certain extent but but that process
and I've said this before but 51% of the
show that I love is what the audience
sees 49% is the process during the day
mm-hmm and if the process sucked the
show's got to be fantastic for me to not
just be dead at the end of the day the
Adrenaline's got to save me at the end
of the day but the process if that's
beautiful then you're way ahead on the
show is there a skill that you have
gained from doing the show now they
didn't have before I'm okay if you see
me you know that's I was not okay for
you to see me what do you mean by that
well I did everything in character hmm I
I was always in care I mean when I got
the offer to do this show I said to my
my agent who brought to my manager James
baby doll Dixon who me and Carson Daly
and Jimmy Kimmel and he's the real king
of late-night James Dixon because he
represents so many people in that field
and I said baby doll
you know I'm an actor if I go take that
gig that'll be the first thing I ever do
in my career that's not acting so you're
an actor first comedian second was was
I'm a comic actor you know there's I
don't separate comedy and acting but I
learned all my comedy through acting and
improvisation which is a form of acting
and so this is the first time that I've
just been myself and that took me awhile
to find the way to I'd never minded
being seen on stage that's when young
actors have to get over the idea that
people are staring at them we have this
sort of monkey aversion to being stared
at and you have to get over like a
desire to like charge the glass and
throw your poop at the audience out of
fear of a fear of judgment or attack or
something like that it really is kind of
primal but I mean to be seen as myself
and for that to be sufficient I'm alkane
personal interpersonal communications or
I could have done this interview with
you back then I did even I did times
talk back when I did a show on character
but to be able to stand on stage and
know that in a form of entertainment
heightened entertainment with pace and
and and and beats and all that thing
that you just yourself or a version of
you because everybody has a persona
he's sufficient took me a little while
to trust so when you go on so when you
had the Colbert Report you had this
braggadocious conservative you know
yeah mask yeah when you do the show now
how much of that is the real Stephen
Colbert how different is that then when
you have dinner at night with with the
kids what very different than when I
have dinner and I over the kids it's I'm
glad to say it's very different that
would be madness for them if I just
stood at the end of the table and went
thank you very much you know you know
funny story about that broccoli they
look like little trees don't they
isn't that crazy how much of that is me
a lot a lot it's you know sesqui
autobiographical it's one and a half
times me hmm and was that just
comforting when in the first year of the
show getting used to that
I did I just didn't know how to use me
mm-hmm I didn't know how to use me I
knew there was something there I just
didn't you know it all shows I think all
shows are essentially emotional events
you know you're sharing an emotional
state with the audience and I mostly
when the show first started a lot of my
emotional state was how do you do this
now that was sort of the emotional state
and you could see that eventually and it
started once in a spring shortly after
you you came and gave us the space to
find it it was late late in the spring
when you kind of knew who the candidates
were in 2016 that you kind of knew what
the story was all the time and it made
it easier for me to find my emotional
Center on stage because I had a feeling
about the story every day and I learned
to express that feeling in the jokes and
remind myself and the writers that every
day that's what I've got to do I'm
actually sharing how I feel about what
everybody in the audience has been
feeling all day that's part of the here
what's the national conversation what
have you guys been thinking about but
it's really what are you guys been
feeling about today this is what I've
been feeling about it today and then
when the monologues not working mostly
is when I when I afterwards I have to go
after rehearsal I have to say oh how do
I feel about this we've got all these
jokes but they're all kind of above the
water
our skeg isn't in the water and all we
have to do is just dip that scag in the
water and then we realize what jokes are
merely not merely because it takes
intellectual sweat but kind of like word
tricks some jokes are just word tricks
you know they're clever
that's a boy that's a damning thing to
say to a comedian that's very clever
just did their and once you know how you
emotionally feel about it you know which
which jokes are not clever tricks and
which ones you mean mm-hmm and that that
took that took me a while to realize
that even though I wasn't acting it was
still an emotional event if you dig what
I'm saying yeah daddio
well that rattled me now he's gay
so obviously the I mean the turning
point it seems like for your show came
on election night in 2016 it was really
signet it was really significant yeah
why did the audience start gravity of
gravitating towards you after that I'm
gonna fact-check you on this did because
I don't I didn't I we didn't actually
start talking the ratings until well
into the Trump presidency so I don't
know when did they start grab wanted to
start changing no but when did the
audience start like when did it start
going up when did they start okay so
when we started doing live shows it
brought an immediacy to the writing
because there's no time for another
draft it brought an immediacy to my
performance because there's no sense
that I could actually do a pickup or
anything like that and an urgency or an
intention to the interview because I had
to get it in 8 minutes or I had to get
it in 10 minutes that we did 14 live
shows or something before we ever did
the the live election night show so we
were ready for that night in every way
other than what happened
but no I know your answer but that's
literally the case though right you
literally you literally were not you had
you had personal and for the other we
had four shows
we knew that were possible mrs. Clinton
wins and we know it looks like she's
gonna win but we're not sure Donald
Trump could win but we won't know til
the next day and he's definitely won we
had these three we had material for
these three and we started working on
this one but I said to my guys I saw the
first few drafts of things who worked
and I said forget it I said don't do it
I said I'm not saying it's impossible
what I'm saying is if that happens it's
it's it's like I'm hosting a show in a
slaughterhouse like emotionally people
are gonna be so raw that I don't know
what Joe commits so disastrous in my
opinion that I'm not I'm not sure if I
can dance on the edge of that volcano
anyway let's just let the lava flow over
us if that happens and we'll improvise
we'll see what happens and after the
production team where they like well
Stephen we really we really should have
something no I think I think I think I
mean as soon as I said that everyone
like yeah you're right they didn't want
to write it who wants to sit there I go
okay let's just we got the other three
what if he wins
so so cuz again it's an emotional event
and you have to write the thing about
writing with urgency is that you have to
anticipate the emotional quality of the
performance when you write it what's
this gonna feel like you're playing it
in your head you got the old occipital
rolodex of all the possible ways that an
idea plays with an audience and there's
just no there was no scenario in our
head where that led to chuckles and so
we said fuck it just we won't do
anything and I said and I'll just
improvise and we'll just we'll talk
about surf the madness and then woody
became like literally at what time what
time we went on at 11:00 right it wasn't
a normal time because with show time was
11:00 to 12:00 and I think around 10:00
I'm doing final makeup and everything
like that and people are coming to me in
the makeup chair and they're going I
just want to give you a little update on
538 the times has changed their
prediction what the percentages are
unlike this does I can't no don't I
don't I can't no in the dome of the
theater because we have this beautiful
digital projection dome in the theater
we had all we had said we were loaded
for bear we had so I wish you could have
seen the show we had planned for you
guys so we should do it someday we
should do all that material
maybe after he's out of office we just
do all that material one night
and and because we had we have we have
fantastic we had the great Rowland's
from Katy Perry I mean we put a lot of
effort in us who else other stars came
in we who were the other so we had big
female stars because it was like a night
for women and empowerment and we had we
had naked men because it was show time
we had show time and we're like you
couldn't do full frontal nudity on show
time so we had buck naked men in
rehearsal and on their asses it was
painted eye with her because we're all
saying like listen everybody's always
naked women on these Showtime and HBO
shows let's have naked men it changes
tonight bring them out so it was like it
was like this it was like that and I'm
with her on the ass and and we actually
halfway through the thing they have
these guys actually wiped it off and
painted on their own ass this we're
fucked on the back of it we were
scrambling baby we were talking about
where's where's the wheel on this truck
we're just jackknifed and down the
highway taking down telephone poles with
us as we went and so we had this anyway
in the dome we had this pie chart in the
dome and the pie chart showed the
electoral college we're showing it
filling up blue or red and with like and
with like a like a yellow or a green
unfilled yet like that and I walked down
stage to do the monologue and I've
already been told like we will know
sooner than we hoped I'm like really
well okay so I walked out I looked up
and I saw the dome filling up red and I
looked over to Chris if you look at the
thing I was like cut so they took it out
of the dome because we were afraid our
audience would look up because we didn't
want them to know because they had no
they had no cell phones or anything like
that they didn't know they were finding
out for me the live audience and we
didn't want them to look up and go it's
over
Brenda you know hide the kids you know
we so so yeah it was the head man and
then and then we did like whatever the
wheels came off and we killed all the
comedy after like 15 minutes in
something like that of an hour I had 45
minutes left in the show or something
like that to Phil and then we went 20
minutes long so I did like an hour and
50 hour and five minutes something like
that just by the seat of my pants just
talking to people who were just as
gobsmacked as I was
god bless Jeff Goldblum god el King
saying Jeff Goldblum the guys from the
circus of some comedians Charlamagne tha
God it was and we've drinkin we're
drinking good bourbon we started
drinking and then at the last 10 minutes
we're like okay that's it right we know
now we kind of know and I I just didn't
know what to say so I just stood behind
my Destiny's just started talking and
that's how we entered it was there a
part of you just the human side of you
that was like I don't wanna do the show
tonight I'm too upset yeah I mean yeah
yeah but but there is like you say how
much does the show is you well you have
you know the show must go on and it's
the show doesn't there and even really
the show must go on is not like you
can't disappoint the audience the show
must go on because you have geared
yourself toward doing that thing you're
like an arrow that's already been
released from the bow and you got to go
do it and so I wanted to go do it and
actually I didn't want to not do it even
though it was not the outcome that I
wanted it stopped being comedy it just
became an experience but it didn't want
to do it any less because it was
emotionally raw and as soon as it was
over I think to answer in the longest
possible way your original question from
this section of tonight's lecture
was why did that change is because when
the show was over Chris said that was
raw that was real and I said it was
absolutely emotionally true for me and
now I know that I don't ever want it to
be this deep but now I know how to do
this show it's that we can't ever lie to
the audience for any reason and the way
you mustn't a lie to the audience is
emotionally because they can smell that
and so we work really hard to keep our
emotional Skeggs in the water all the
time because I didn't want to go through
that night for nothing for sure and the
thing we took out of it is if if you if
you feel it the audience will feel it
with you
and if you if you let yourself be
emotionally honest and that's what
changed for us for the show was that
election night and then we have tried
really hard hit or miss we've tried
really hard to keep our Scaggs in the
water what do you think your show would
look like if Hillary Clinton had won the
election I don't I don't know I might I
don't I don't know I mean do you ever
think about that no I don't I don't have
time to think about anything other than
what's actually happening I think there
would be such a Matt think of the level
of unexpected racial animosity that came
about when Barack Obama was elected
president things that that shocked
people oh I didn't realize there were
still dragons around now there's a
dragon out there
the misanthropy or the the the the the
misogyny that would have been up drafted
not that it wasn't already in the in the
campaign but the up drafting of misogyny
I think would have been heartbreaking
and would have been something to respond
to is that's all that's what were there
to do to respond to what happened today
mm-hmm you're obviously not shy about
your politics and in fact your
willingness to I think skewer Trump has
helped ratings but I think your audience
is largely I think made up of people
that agree with you and I
wonder if possible I wonder if do you
think you're given how polarized we are
as a country do you feel like you're
contributing to that in any way I don't
know I mean I'm gonna let myself off the
hook I suppose that's possible I don't
people will tell me that the show has an
influence on them they said that by the
old show - it has an influence on them
and Who am I to say that it's not you
know if they say it's influencing than
it is not my intention my intention is
to laugh about what happened today make
jokes what would happen today and 99.9
percent of the time and but I think the
show actually reflects what's happening
it doesn't create what's happening hmm
you know we're we we have our own you
know editorial agency we we choose the
things we're going to talk about today
but we talk about what we're talking
about today
because this was the conversation today
for the most part there are some things
that our conversation today that are too
tragic to touch and to touch those they
have to be inescapable the only thing
being spoken about and then you have to
approach it honestly and if I find
what's happening a horror I have to make
jokes that reflect that and it's turned
out that I am NOT alone in that feeling
I don't think I'm creating the
audience's feelings I don't think I'm
leading their feelings I think I'm
saying this is how I felt today and
people watching the show because they
say oh yeah I agree that's how I felt
today right
well you've actually recently in a
monologue joke you briefly referenced
the challenges of writing jokes on the
quote baby cages talking about Sarah oh
yeah sure and you know you said Sarah
you think you don't want to talk about
the child separation policy try doing it
on a comedy show yeah and you know oh
you must love the Trump administration
Stephen the sadness just writes itself
yes and how often do you want to just
break character
and talk to the audience about what is
happening I'm not in character and I do
talk about to the audience what's
happening but I'm doing it as a comedian
you know I have no desire to throw away
the jokes and go look I'll tell you what
I think that the actual moral landscape
of America is being permanently damaged
I mean this but you laughed because I
did it but if I did it you wouldn't
laugh and I want to make them laugh I
want to make the day better for them I
want to make the day better for me I
want I want the sense of community for
the audience you know that's I'm there
for them as much as they're there for me
I need them as much as they might need
the jokes on the show but the only time
I want to drop the jokes is that if I
think doing a joke on the thing is
disrespectful to the person's tragedy
when there is an inescapable
all-consuming story like of the
all-too-frequent gun tragedies I can't
not talk about it because that in its
way is dishonest but it would be I don't
know how I as a human being can add a
joke to that so I'll speak about it
sincerely and I'll speak about it from
the heart and that's the only time I
want to do that but I never want to have
to do that can you give me an instance
where you felt like this is something I
don't have a joke for like any gun
tragedy mm-hmm major tragedy other
people's like the people's death you
know specific death death in general is
hilarious
I mean a lot of people but a lot of
conveniens get into comedy I think to
like laugh at death and I can't get me
and nice try but so but someone's
someone's a public tragedy of someone
else you know the me to movement is not
something the the the the reporting on
it the spinning of it the attempts to
get out from under it all those things
that are reactions to a tragic
revelation are different I was working
for The Daily Show when John was hadn't
been there that long when 9/11 happened
about two years and we went off the air
like all the all the late night shows
did and all the comedies did at least
the ones that are topical and our way
back into it was not to talk about the
event not the not the center of it but
to go way out on the spokes to the
outside of the wheel and to talk about a
reaction to it and not not critically
but like how one of the first jokes we
did was how people who really didn't
like Giuliani suddenly really liked him
and you know it was like the joke was
you know before John it was you know I'm
Rudy Giuliani I'm an iron-fisted leader
and do what I say and things will be
fine
but and because and now it was now it's
like I'm Rudy Giuliani I'm an
iron-fisted leader do what I say and
everything will be fine
it's just inflection really and so that
was the thin end of the wedge will come
back into talking about the story well
we always want to do that but it but
it's the tragedies that keep you off
what is your level of Trump fatigue if
any about having to joke about I'm about
having to you know follow his twitter
feed about having to you know I stopped
following his Twitter feed for a couple
of months I just joined again this
weekend I was kind of off for a lot I
figure to have it's big enough
somebody'll tell me are you tired of
joking about it no cuz I'm not tired of
joking and it's it's the conversation
you know and I'm not going to escape him
being the President of the United States
by not making jokes about him
and by making jokes about him I feel
better I mean III have us I have a
release you know the people come at me
and say I just I loved your show at the
end of the day I feel better about the
day I feel the same way the the day
after Donald Trump was elected we went
with the live show the night before
didn't get a lot of sleep did the show
the next night I immediately walked on
stage went oh I can't believe how much I
need the audience and how I need the
sense of community so therapeutic for
you it's completely therapeutic for me
yeah I love it
it I feel some I always feel better than
when I went on stage and so am I tired
of him being the president you bet
am I tired making jokes about him no so
how do you think this ends like are we
going to revert to the tree happily very
happily so are we going to revert to the
traditional mold of candidates after
Trump or are we head if I don't think I
don't think the country will be the same
I think America president Michael
avenatti like what are we headed towards
here I don't think so
I don't think so I think I think the
president is what did Sean Spicer koma a
unicorn riding over a rainbow or
something like that I think is I think
he is a unique individual that I think I
don't think there are a lot of I don't
think there are a lot of Donald Trump
out there
so I don't know I think we return to
some sense of normalcy after this or
whatever it weirder that means after
this I we get a boring president next
because this guy's exciting
I assume that lik I don't when I heard
that Mitt Romney was running for Senate
I'm like oh god that sounds fantasise
Mitt Romney that's oh that is a
room-temperature glass of milk that I
could really go for you know like you
know if if it was Mitt Romney or Trump I
love oh god Mitt Romney would be
fantastic so I think we get boring after
this but I think the country is changed
irreparably sounds like it's all damaged
but I would say irrevocably our politics
are changed by what mr. Trump has done
to show what how social media can be
leveraged how demagoguery can be used in
America in ways that we haven't seen in
our lifetimes before so it'll never be
the same
hmm so my opinion I don't know okay so
in late July Ronan Farrow writes a big
New Yorker story about sexual misconduct
allegations against the CEO CBS les
Moonves you talked about it I almost got
the spit-take water in my mouth for you
that you talked about it at length on
the show and he's your boss three
minutes at length if that's the pretty
stuff given given that he's your boss
given his power at the company yeah had
you ever done came first first before
anything can you take us what's your
reaction to seeing the news did you
merely go back to and say we have to
talk about this stress called me I was I
was down in South Carolina with my
lovely wife having dinner with my lunch
with my in-laws and Chris goes there's
gonna be an article coming out and in
The New Yorker it was like an hour later
or something like that I guess CBS has
gotten heads-up or fact-check or
something like that and I said well what
is it how bad is it and he said I don't
know nobody's seen it yet and then I saw
it and ruined my weekend and nothing my
nothing my weekend matters but that's
all I thought about for the rest of week
I was like oh well this is Trent it's
clear to me that I have to say something
on Monday because we talk about what
people are talking about and we've
talked about most of the major
revelations since the sort of the public
knowledge of the meet to movement which
has gone on for years but after survey
certainly Ronan's harvey article not
quite a year ago coming up on a year
we're coming up on the Harvey versary
and we've we've been we've we've we've
talked about it so I knew
I I did something I would want to talk
about I I came into the office that day
and I told my my exact Tom Purcell I
said there is no show there was only the
second act for me
we knew I knew we would do jokes in the
monologue we did we did a couple of like
standard the same level of jokes we did
about everybody else we did three jokes
on on Leslie Moonves and then three
minutes at the desk and I primarily
wrote it myself you know rode with Tom
but it was it was what I want her to say
and did you get the higher-ups a heads
up we sent it to them right before we
taped it right we sent it to them and
they did not say anything about we said
we're gonna do this we didn't say can we
do this we said we're going to do this
and I think they just said thanks for
the heads up and that was it mmm had you
ever done something like that before
I'm not purposely being obtuse but what
do you mean by that like that go after
your own Network go after your own
bosses on the air in anyway I mean I
know you've got after your own Network
yeah I got off my own network of the old
show paramount yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah
but not but not like this but it would
that was that was all comedic like like
Viacom not supporting me to get Daft
Punk on the show and MTV like literally
we'd we'd built a whole like the show of
the summer around deaf punk and they
don't show up because MTV will not
release them from their obligation to
only be on the MTV Movie Awards like two
days after my show and I dedicated the
entire show to making fun of my own
corporate entity for having done that to
me that I loved and that's directly from
that's like a quote from Dave that's the
sort of thing that Dave would do all the
time like like they sent me a letter
saying you can't do it for the following
reasons and I said the letter goes thus
and like I read it on air and I had an
agreement with the old network I just
said to them don't ever send me a letter
telling me I can't do something because
if you put it in writing I promise you I
will read it on air and every time they
would do it they would forget and then I
would do it they'd go shit
we forgot if we put it in writing so
they just stopped sending they stopped
saying no to me because a phone calls
done enough they have to put it in
writing and I would read it every time
but again all of that is comedy this is
different no nothing like that
mmm cuz I've never worked for anybody
like him before he's a really big deal
mm-hmm
I have to admit I was a bit surprised by
the decision to have Sean Spicer at the
Emmys and you are not alone yeah and
bring him onstage at the podium and you
told Andy Cohen last night that you had
no regrets about it
I wonder can you tell me a little bit
how it came about yeah we were we had
worked on the monologue I don't know we
were my we had like a 15 minute
monologue in our pocket or something
like that and we wanted a final we knew
that the all the last jokes were really
about the president it was about him
having never having won an Emmy it was
about ratings that sort of thing and the
last thing was about the only thing the
man cares about his ratings he cares
about TV this is a TV president and the
thing that he always criticizes for is
his people's terrible ratings and so I
thought how can I make fun of his
obsession with ratings and I'll go oh
well he's really obsessed with his own
ratings and that would be Shawn to come
out here and to do that so we called him
you called him right you had drinks with
them and so how did it go he said really
it was not a tough sell
okay was not a tough sell and did you
have a conversation with him beforehand
to try some do you need to tell him at
all are you know did Chris do all I
didn't meet him I didn't meet him until
rehearsal yeah we just came out of
rehearsal and I said all you do is hit
that mark say your line and you're
totally fine that's all I need you to do
and here's the reason why I was
perfectly fine with it is that the joke
is not I felt a little bit bad for him
because he's a walking punch line
he is the punch line the punch line is I
lied on behalf of the President now I'm
gonna lie to the president and using the
same lies I did for him which is a joke
really about Donald Trump the jokes
about Donald Trump and how Donald Trump
lies about anything and he pays people
to lie for him so I'm gonna pay somebody
to lie for me that's what the joke is
about in this instance was the joke
written before you guys approached
speiser like you guys knew exactly what
you wanted him to do or was I know
exactly what the joke was I think it was
my pitch I don't remember that I've been
told
certainly afterwards everyone said no no
that was your idea boss no I think I
Christi I think that was my idea I said
I think we should have him a nihilist we
talked about it some people like know
people are gonna be mad and like people
will be mad about a lot of things and I
think you I don't think you're
necessarily wrong but I'm what'swhat's
this work without any risk I called John
Stewart and I said what do you think and
he said you got to that's the perfect
ending to the monologue and and I said
well people are gonna like think that
that might be you know like it might be
like
normalizing Trump is actually what we
were worried about cuz we didn't think
of Sean Spicer as as he seemed like a
sort of a sad figure to us at that point
who was never ever going to really work
again and this might be the last time
anybody ever sees him ever
honest to god it never occurred it never
like people were some people afterwards
were like oh you're gonna normalize him
I never for a minute imagined that it
would redeem him in the eyes of the
public and I'm gonna go out on a limb
and say I was right that it did not
redeem him in the eyes of the public
and and and he's not Donald Trump he's
not the actual source of the cancer he
he's a he's a symptom
and so when it was over I was happy for
him
well I'll tell you right before he
walked out on stage so I just the
monologue gonna to go gone pretty well
and and I'm looking around the room and
and I just done the joke about like Oh
Donald Trump you know Donald Trump's
never won an Emmy because you know in
the Emmys the popular vote wins and I
got a nice laugh in the room and I
looked around the room and I looked
around them and I thought there's not
one person in this room who disagrees
with me except Gerald McRaney you know
the major dad guy mm-hmm because I think
he's a Republican he spoke at DOL's
convention and I went oh maybe Gerald
wouldn't like these jokes maybe he
thinks these jokes are a little tough
and then I saw the next joke I just
improvised where I said where do I find
the courage to tell these jokes in this
room which got another laugh because I
knew what was about to happen but I
wanted that to happen because if you
don't piss off the people who agree with
you every so often you're not trying
would you have been willing to do the
same thing for Stephen Miller he I don't
think he was no because he was still in
power
what's assumed that he left the White
House under what terms did he leave the
White House did he say I'm against this
and throw down his gauntlet and say I am
out of here
embrace the downtrodden like what what
is your hypothetical my hypothetical is
that he left the White House in the same
way Sean Spicer did and that they called
a resignation but he was essentially
moved out but yeah but essentially
essentially in the same way that special
left I don't know I don't know I would
have to go back and think about what we
knew about Stephen Miller at that moment
because he's a far more corrosive figure
and in he seems like a more insidious
figure than a a beaten dog mouthpiece
this is what Sean Spicer family felt
like to me and a sad figure who could be
useful in a punch line and as I said I
kind of felt bad about it for the
reason that I was sort of mom using this
man's reputation for my joke Steven
Miller is more insidious than that so I
don't know but again I don't know I'd
have to go see what I knew about him at
the time he certainly seemed a little
not quite making eye contact with you
you know back then that there was
something a little bit scary about him
mm-hmm I have one more question and I'll
tell you one thing that I released about
about Sean Spicer Leeson I said that
so my writers and I said the only thing
I regret is you guys did such a good job
I wouldn't want that last joke to take
away from all the fantastic jokes you
guys wrote because I was so proud of the
job they've done mmm I have one more
question then we were to take a couple I
have a couple questions here from the
audience and then we're gonna have some
questions from people watching the live
stream on facebook comedy has you know
late night comedy has historically been
a very white very male-dominated place
especially in the writers room as you
were launching your show is that
something you've thought about and over
the last three years I'm just curious
what efforts you've made to divert
thought we thought very specifically I'd
been very frustrated at the old show
about my inability to find diverse
candidates for thanks very much for the
show and and and I it was late in that
show when I came to realize that it was
my naivete that a normal process would
get you and a unusual the usual process
would get you the unusual room it wasn't
until we said no you please don't send
us anyone but women that the because we
would say like it's very important we
want it writers color we want women and
you would get 150 packets and there'd be
eight women mm-hm and we're like that's
so frustrating until I said no only
women and then I got 87 women and I
thought where were these where were
these people before and it and that was
sort of the realization of money in my
naivete that it's not enough to say you
want it you have to go to a the not
ordinary step of it occurred to us at
the time that what this was on ordinary
now now
we get a more balanced mix when we ask I
think there's thankfully some changes
going on in in the way women are
perceived by the agents and managers and
and just sort of word of mouth in the
comedy world but we realized we had
actually make an extraordinary step to
get an extraordinary room now we have
it's half
you know white guys and half either
women or writers of color something like
that if I think that's right half and
half now yeah got it
so let's move to so let's move to some
these are questions from people sitting
in the audience this is from Liz fine
Liz fine asks would you trade your
success to be rid of the current
president yes okay with us and I can say
that because I know saying it will not
take away my success
that's how courageous I am Howard asks
what do you think the effect will be if
any of the current occupant of the White
House on late night host coverage of
future candidates and presidents I don't
think the speed will ever change
I think everybody does their job faster
wait I thought I did we did fast work on
the old show this show is you know as my
friend John Cyril I should say it's like
going from college to pro ball it's like
it's so fast to do one of these shows
there's so much material but the news
cycle I think will never slow down and I
don't think that candidates in the
future will ever allow it to slow down
because they'll want to recapture the
attention of the press they want to make
the news story they want to change the
cycle within minutes the way Trump does
now hmm you'll see that as a tool got it
Danijela from facebook asks i love this
question what happens when you have to
take a sick day I don't but I've never
taken one ever even on The Colbert show
how I mean deport down to the new show
now 600 something like that I've done
2,000 shows I've never taken a sick day
I've been sick I've done showing a
bathrobe
Paul Krugman was my guest actually Paul
Kruger my guest I just sat there and
again that's a real quote from Dave Dave
I remember Dave when I was in college
Dave doing the old show at NBC with a
fever and checking his head and nurse
check his fever as the show went on and
I just loved that I thought that was
just so fantastic that I was kind of
excited when I got sick like I was like
throwing up shaking can't move sick and
you know a doctor came in and shot me
full of some whatever wonder drug b12
cortisone heroin whatever they gave me
but I was still like a trembling
feverish mess it didn't cure me and I
did I did it I did a show it was fun
mm-hmm well I remember I think during
The Daily Show I forget John either I
think he he got sick at there or
something happened in with the last
thing I don't have got sick but Jason
Jones filled with filled in at the last
second yeah if some serve emergency were
to happen are there any procedures in
place at all okay you can host God Wow
I'm fine right now though no there are
no prints you know what it's called a
rerun right we would just do a rerun
that's what we would do we've done
enough now that we can do a rerun Aaron
from facebook says well
what is the most awkward small talk you
have made with guests during a
commercial break oh I can't wait I
haven't had a chance to see it but I
just can't wait I just I hear I hear
it's it's just I hear it's just so great
and which is this what sequel is this
some third or the fourth one it's not
that awkward really got you got you you
smell good right
sometimes they smell great and the
audience at home can't tell that I
wondered I don't think it's appropriate
for me to tell the audience that they
smell good
for instance Nicki Minaj smells
fantastic and this actually came to hug
me she sat down and I although it was
like God she smells fantastic don't say
that
I think who haven't you interviewed yet
that you'd like to a Chris who's out
there who is there's somebody like we've
been is there a white whale yeah more
Republicans more Republicans would be
fun I mean we we have them sometimes but
it's usually people who have decided to
retire you can only interview Jeff Flake
so many times I don't know I just don't
know I don't know I don't know I I I'm
kind of grateful for anybody who comes
on because you just don't you just you
you be so surprised by people some some
time I mean she's a giant star I didn't
know that I'd have one of the most fun
nights of my life ever with Nicki Minaj
for ten minutes tonight I don't know and
saying like that person's gonna be the
great guest usually is is a lie to
yourself it's you know it's the people
who surprise you and so do you always
visit them for the show start no rarely
do really really I've never met them
before I stopped that typical throughout
like dude about like no I don't know I
don't uh I'm like did John meet with his
guests like to say hello before the show
I think sometimes maybe I owe the old
show I would always go in because I
wanted to explain to them just to make
sure they knew I was in character and I
would say the same thing every time I
would say hey thanks so much for being
here you know I do the show in character
and he's an idiot and he's willfully
ignorant of what you know and care about
please honestly disabuse me of my
ignorance and we'll have a great time
because what I wanted them to do was
just to just to - honestly represent
their idea and I and I would fail to
understand them and that was the that
wasn't the game mm-hmm
they've never said hi to me hmm until I
was the next guy in the seat and he came
back and said hi to me to congratulate
me all right
one of the most incredible moments of
television I think we've seen from your
show is your interview with Joe Biden oh
yeah that was an honor that was an honor
we talked before that we talked before
that what is running through your head
as the interview is happening do you
realize that this is a moment that's
going to resonate with the with the
viewers mm-hmm
no I was very moved by his willingness
to share his his experience his feelings
about the loss of his son his faith and
so I mean the best interview is your not
detached in any way you're not thinking
about how this plays but you're
connected to the person and he he gave
me a great gift that night by by
trusting me with his story or trusting
our audience and and that experience
with his story and I remember when he
left I turned to one of my producers and
I said that nice old man just gave me
the gift of me needing to be myself with
him that I knew that only myself and
only the person who had gone through
what I've gone through in my life and
the losses that I had faced could
receive what he was saying and so that
was the very first time that the guest
helped me open my own door and be myself
on stage in a truly honest way which
which you know comes and goes but if
there was one thing that the one aspect
of it that made me stand outside of
myself it was after he left I realized
that he had he had needed that for me to
have the interview but it was one of the
most beautiful experiences on stage that
I've ever had in my life and it was
truly a blessing to have done it when
you walked offstage after the show ended
that show you mean yes that's it that
specific show I imagine most days you
know you just finished making jokes for
an hour hour and a half did you what
were you feeling did you call anybody
new did you try to get in touch with him
to say anything I thank you like what
did you what did you know I thanked him
and thanked him like did you have any
emotional reaction to the show later or
something like that
what did you have any emotional reaction
after the show or anything like that
yeah yeah hmm and then there are also
some I think I'd guess after him though
right oh yeah Chris you weren't there
yet I wish you have been I'm sure like
after him I might have been I don't know
it might have been him and then Lois
black
no like you know you have that's the
thing about the show is that you have to
switch gears you have to like you know
your your your comedic intellectual and
emotional tofu you kind of like you have
to match your energy to the next person
not everybody's gonna be Joe Biden right
and then you have some interviews that
are a little bit harder that are a
little bit more you have to ask awkward
questions like I'm thinking about the
reasonably Bill Clinton and James
Patterson um you know built for those of
you didn't see Bill Clinton you know
seemingly flubbed a response to NBC
about questions to Monica Lewinsky was
that a moment where you felt obligated
to ask him about it
comedic Lee or you know to make him feel
at home since you're hosting a comedy
show or is it to give him a grilling
essentially I'm not there to grill
anybody you know what I mean I'm not
that I'm not an adversary to my guests
so I'm not there you know I'm not there
to stick a knife on anybody but as soon
as I found out that we had we had I wait
so Chris so I don't look at the board
every day sometimes I don't know who the
guest is until I show up sometimes not
til they walk in and say there's your
guest tonight because there's a lot to
do and I and I trust my staff and that
they booked great people and fantastic
and I it was like three days before
President Clinton was on and I turned to
Chris and I said really Bill Clinton do
you know I you know like I haven't seen
him on one of he hasn't really been out
much since the whole meat to movement
started you know I got a you know and he
said yeah I know and I'm like you know I
don't want to do that right I don't want
to do that now I have to do it I mean I
want to do it as an honest performer and
someone who's doing consistent work but
it isn't going no fun for me to talk
about the thing that as a person on
stage in that moment someone who's talk
show I will not enjoy it all if I don't
I can have both of those feelings at the
same time it's like yeah
it'll be great like I I do not share
your confidence and so you know I I knew
I knew I had to do it I didn't have any
problem with doing it but I would be
uncomfortable and so I tried to say it
is just as clearly again like not to
beat a dead horse here but like to speak
exactly how I felt as soon as I found
out that I'd be speaking to mr. Clinton
whose presidency I admire and who I've
had a wonderful time with many times but
given the light of the way we're looking
at a lot of past sexual misconduct to
say you why were you surprised by the
questions that you were getting from the
Today Show because you are the the the
most famous example of a powerful man
misbehaving sexually at work misusing
the power dynamic of my lifetime and and
I think there were some follow-up
questions but that was the hard one to
get out mm-hmm we're just about time
someone I asked one more question
which is many late-night comedy show
hosts their careers are measured in
decades
I wonder do you think about how much
longer you can do this and a follow-up
to that is at some point we assume that
Donald Trump will no longer be President
we do assume that don't we do what they
say about assuming yeah do you worry
about the direction of the show once
Donald Trump leaves office no at all
not at all because you know the show is
about what happens today the shows what
about what happened today or what
everybody's talking about today and and
basically we say Oh what did what
everybody talking about today what's
everybody thinking about or worrying
about or whatever it is we know you have
thoughts we know you have feelings about
it
here are thoughts and feelings about it
that doesn't change mr. Trump became a
singular story that I think added focus
to our work but he's not the work like I
was we didn't we were not doing Fridays
right now because the summertime we're
not doing Fridays at the last Friday we
did
there's not one Trump joke in the
monologue it was all other things and it
worked fine and how lovely that was he
was on vacation and didn't make news
that day people really weren't strangely
talking about him I think baby talked
about pence or something like that but
whatever it is I don't know what
Monday's should I what today was to what
is today Monday I don't know what
Tuesday show I don't know what tomorrow
show is so I don't really know what the
show would be when he leaves but I would
I know it probably never be it'll always
be as fast and it'll always be about
what people were talking about today and
that will never change
hmm well Stephen thank you so much for
your time thank you very much
duh Thanks thank you so much don't bend
up everybody thanks very much